The recent Covid-19 pandemic has had significant psychological and social effects on the population.
The social distance and the security measures have affected the relationship among people and their 
perception of empathy toward others. From this perspective, telepsychology and technological devices 
assume important roles to decrease the negative effects of the pandemic.
The Covid-19 pandemic led to a prolonged exposure to stress. As a consequence, researchers showed 
an increased interest in measuring social and community uneasiness in order to psychologically support 
the population. This increased attention might help in managing the current situation and other possible 
epidemics and pandemics. The security measures adopted in managing the pandemic had different consequences 
on individuals, according to the social role invested. Some segments of the population seem to be more exposed 
to the risk of anxious, depressive, and post-traumatic symptoms because they are more sensitive to stress.

Telepsychology, for instance, is a valid tool, effective in taking charge 
of the psychological suffering caused by the pandemic and in preventing the chronicity of the disease. 
The prolonged stress could involve anxiety, depression, and the inability to manage traumatic and negative 
emotions. Furthermore, the constant fear of contagion affects daily life and leads to social isolation, 
modifying human relations.
Studies of pandemics faced over time, such as SARS, Ebola, H1N1, Equine Flu, and the current COVID-19, 
show that the psychological effects of contagion and quarantine is not limited on the fear of contracting 
the virus. There are some elements related to the pandemic that affect more the population.
These aspects might lead to dramatic consequences, such as the rise of suicides.
Suicidal behaviors are often related to the feeling of anger associated with 
the stressful condition widely spread among people who live in the most affected areas. 
In light of these consequences, a carefully evaluation of the potential benefits of the quarantine is needed, 
taking into account the high psychological costs.

As reported in a recent survey administered during the Covid-19 pandemic, children and young adults are particularly 
at risk of developing anxious symptoms.
In general, parents observed emotional and behavioral changes in their children during the quarantine: 
symptoms related to difficulty concentrating, boredom, irritability, restlessness,
nervousness, sense of loneliness, uneasiness, and worries. From the comparison between 
the two groups—Spanish and Italian parents—it emerged that the Italian parents reported more symptoms in their children 
than the Spanish parents. On the contrary, having infected relatives or 
acquaintances leads to a worsening in anxiety symptoms. Furthermore, the economic problems and the slowdown in academic 
activities are related with anxious symptoms. In addition, an online survey conducted on the 
general population in China found that college students are more likely to experiencing stress, anxiety, and depression 
than others during the pandemic. These results suggest monitoring and promoting mental health of 
youths in order to reduce the negative impact of the quarantine.

Health-care workers are another segment of population particularly affected by stress. 
Health-care workers are at risk to develop symptoms common in catastrophic situations, such as post-traumatic stress 
disorder, burnout syndrome, physical and emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and dissociation. 
However, an epidemic presents different peculiarities compared to a catastrophic event, for instance, 
the stigmatizing attitudes in particular toward health professionals, who are in daily contact with the 
risk of infection. During SARS, up to 50% of health-care professionals suffered from acute 
psychological stress, exhaustion, and post-traumatic stress, caused by the fear of contagion of their family 
members and the prolonged social isolation.

As a consequence of the pandemic, the health professionals who were overworked suffered high level of psychophysical 
stress. Health professionals also lived/live in daily life a traumatic condition called secondary traumatic stress 
disorder, which describes the feeling of discomfort experienced in the helping relationship when treatments are not 
available for all patients and the professional must select who can access them and who cannot. Also, the constant fear 
of contagion leads to obsessive thoughts, increasing the progressive closure of the person 
and reducing social relationships. Also, women are more likely to be affect by anxiety, 
depression, and distress. Indeed, the medical staff at younger ages 
reports higher self-rated depression scores and more concern about infecting their families than those of older age. 
	
As emerged by the recent literature, the promotion of psychological interventions on the specific population who 
is more likely to develop pathologies and suffering is needed. The Lancet Global Mental Health Commission’s observation 
reported that the use of digital technologies can provide mental health interventions in order to reduce anxiety and 
stress levels and increase self-efficacy.

At the same time, as a consequence of the emerging issues, psychotherapists provided psychological support online, 
addressing the technological challenge. In line with the technological progress, professional 
organizations promoted specific guidelines and policies related to customer protection, privacy, screening, evaluation, 
and development of self-help products. Technological development in mental 
health foreshadows future trends that include "smart" mobile devices, cloud computing, virtual worlds, virtual reality, 
and electronic games in addition to the traditional psychotherapy tools. In this perspective, it is important to 
help future generations of psychologists and patients to collaborate in the potential growth areas, through education 
and training on the benefits and effectiveness of telepsychology .

Indeed, more awareness of the potentials of the online services is needed, exploring the main differences between the 
devices in order to use them in relation to the specific purposes identified by 
the professional. For example, the Italian Service of Online Psychology conducted a study based on a service of helpdesk 
on Facebook.
At the same time, another helpdesk on Skype provided some psychological sessions via webcam. 
In this line, telecounseling is a diffuse online method used by counselors and psychologists during the recent pandemic.

On this line, a significant example is the Virginia Commonwealth University 
which proposed PhDs in telepsychology, with the aim of training future psychologists in managing the psychological 
effects of the pandemic through an online psychology service. The service provided by the VCU had 
been effective in reducing anxiety, depression, and hospital recoveries. As 
shown, telepsychology assumes a key role in the improvement of health care. Online psychological services avoid geographical 
barriers and are suitable to become a useful integrated tool in addition to traditional psychotherapy.
Online psychological services provide several advantages, especially in the current situation of pandemic. First of all, 
online services help people in a short period of time, reducing the risk of contagion and the strong feeling of anxiety 
in both psychotherapists and patients, who feel uncomfortable in doing traditional psychotherapy due to the pandemic. 
As reported by the authors, online psychological services facilitate access to people who struggle 
to find support close to their social environment, avoiding difficulties related to mobility. Also, online services help 
people who have less confidence in psychotherapy. Indeed, mostly online psychotherapy takes place in one’s comfort zone, 
facilitating the expression of problems and feelings.

According to the situations, online services could provide a different medium. For instance, the chat is a useful tool 
to establish a first assessment of a person who feels uncomfortable in using video. Indeed, the online psychotherapy is 
perceived as more "acceptable."
Each person has a different experience of the network and several levels of disinhibition. For instance, a mild 
disinhibition could be a person who chooses to ask for help talking with a psychologist about their problems.

Online psychological services should be integrated with the various territorial services in order to provide the patients 
local references in relation to the specific health and economic needs. Finally, the possibility for the therapist and for 
the patient to record the sessions via chat and in audio/video mode—with the informed consent of the participants 
— provides another useful tool to compare the sessions and to underline the positive outcomes and the 
effectiveness of the therapeutic process. According to this perspective, online psychological support and psychotherapy 
become a resource for psychotherapists and patients in a co-build relationship.
In analyzing the psychological impact of the quarantine, the importance for individuals to feel integral part of the 
society emerged, an aspect often undervalued in psychological well-being. Experts of public health believe that social 
distancing is the better solution to prevent the spread of the virus. However, although it is not possible to predict 
the duration of the pandemic, we know very well the serious impact of these measures on the society, on relationships 
and interactions, in particular on the empathic process. In the early 90s, empathy was described as a form of identification
in the psychological and physiological states of others. This definition led to a debate between the disciplines 
of philosophy of psychology and philosophy of the mind. Analyzing this aspect within the recent 
situation of the pandemic, an increment of antithetical positions and attitudes could be noticed. On the one hand, 
people identify themselves with those who suffer, 
promoting activities such as the so-called "suspended expenses". For instance, solidarity and humanitarian activities, 
food, and medicine delivery for people who are unable to go to the supermarket. On the other hand, there is a part of 
the population who experiences a feeling of "forced empathy". This aspect could be also emphasized by the use of 
technological devices that might lead to a depersonalization of relationships, forcing the sense of closeness, at least virtually. 
The hyperconnection of feelings becomes a way to reduce the self-isolation and its consequences, representing the 
contrary of the idea of Durkheim, who considered society as a specific entity, built on social facts.
The sensation "to be forced to feel" could lead people to distance themselves from others after the emergency situation, 
incrementing social phobias.

Also, human communication is changing. The formal question "how are you" at the beginning of a conversation is no 
longer just a formality, as before the pandemic. For example, the relationship between employee and the manager is 
different, leading to more responsibilities in listening and understanding feelings expressed during the video call, 
generating a forced reciprocity. Hence, the aforementioned "forced empathy" may be common in this period because the 
social distance and the emergency situation make people want to be heard and appreciated, and the simple question 
"how are you" becomes an anchor to express fears and emotions.
The Covid-19 pandemic has affected the way people live interpersonal relationships. The lockdown was characterized 
of a different organization of daily life, with an incrementation of time at home and a reduction of distance through 
digital devices. This period was also seen as an evolution in the concept of empathy, producing new perspectives in 
the study of the phenomenon according to a sociological and neurological points of view. Indeed, empathy—defined as 
the ability to understand and share the feelings of another—involves several elements, such as social context 
and historical period of the individual, neurological mechanisms. 
The neuro-sociological perspective analyzes the mechanisms involved in the empathic process, focusing on 
human communication and interpersonal relationships. Specifically, 
in this historical period characterized by an increment in the man–machine relationship, neurosociology could become 
one of the principal sciences for the study of human relations and technology.

The first cases of the Coronavirus Disease 2019  were reported in December 2019 in China, and by January 2020 
a novel coronavirus was clearly identified.
Coronaviruses originate from intestinal and respiratory infections and until now two other major coronavirus outbreaks 
have occurred, the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus in 2003 and the Middle East Respiratory 
Syndrome Coronavirus in 2012.

After initially spreading in China, the pandemic quickly had stark repercussions in Asia, Europe and then the rest of 
the world. On 30 January 2020 The World Health Organization officially declared COVID-19 
as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Progressively, the pandemic has entailed 
a tremendous amount of reported cases and deaths, namely approximately 21 million infected people and 755 000 deaths 
reported across 188 countries up till 15 August 2020. By 30 April 2020, at the end of the online survey administered 
in this research, there were over 3 million confirmed cases and almost 250 000 deaths.

The coronavirus outbreak spread quickly across the world due to the large amount of international travels and relative 
ease of transmission. In particular, major ways of infection can occur by 
direct contact with an infected person and droplets or by indirect contact with infected surfaces in the environment.

National lockdowns have been the solution adopted by many countries to slow down the pandemic due to the current 
absence of vaccine and medical interventions. Furthermore, the economic consequences were added to the existing 
health and social crisis; in that sense some authors have even compared this financial crisis to the Great Depression of 1929.

The intensive efforts to keep up social distancing have invariably been accompanied by social isolation.
In addition, negative perceptions and fears associated with disease have increased several mental 
health disorders. In fact, various studies point out a strong correlation between natural 
disasters and epidemics and mental illnesses like depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder.

It is to stress that patients with a previous disorder, for example anxiety, may worsen their symptoms. 
Moreover, it is known that psychological factors and personal beliefs are related with public health action to curtail 
the transmission. Low social and mental support and a high perception of risk appear to be associated 
with psychological symptoms.

Together, these findings seem to be confirmed by recent research regarding social and psychological 
impact of SARS-Cov-2 infection in specific countries, but most of these explorations have been conducted on doctors 
and healthcare workers.
Mental health interventions, like Cognitive Behavioral Therapy or Eye Movement Desensitization and 
Reprocessing, are precious at an early stage because the lack of a psychological support seems to be an 
important risk factor, especially considering that an intermediate 
range of traumatic experience seems to predict a subsequent growth.

In addition to the stark consequences related to human health and individual well-being, the COVID-19 pandemic has 
also entailed several major effects encompassing society and environment, i.e. causing deep modifications related to 
individual mobility  and environmental pollution. This is important to better characterize this historical moment 
according to a global framework as well as understanding which factors most affect people's quality of life.

The anonymous online survey was administered using Google Forms and WenJuanXing platforms and distributed among adult 
students and workers between 17-04-2020 and 30-04-2020. The personal data collected were processed anonymously and 
aggregated for the analysis performed in this study. The research was conducted in compliance with the ethical principles 
of the Helsinki Declaration for human subjects research. The study, consisting of a series of queries related to 
individuals during the pandemic emergency, was considered "at minimum risk" for the participants, who were free to 
refuse participation or abandon the survey at any time.

Psychodiagnostics self-administered tests were employed to measure awareness, coping strategies and psychological impact 
of COVID-19, as already performed in literature and clinical practice to evaluate personal characteristics and 
presence of psychopathology.

The Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale  is deemed to provide information about all these three psychological 
constructs. It is not a categorical measure of clinical diagnoses but is based along a continuum of severity.
The scoring provides the multiplication of the scores by.
The total depression subscale determined scores within the normal range, mild depression, moderate depression, 
severe depression, and extremely severe depression.

This same literature also explains how psychological effects during a pandemic can be mitigated by a number of personal, 
social and environmental factors. These factors include, for example, several types of fears: infection, inadequate 
psychological and social assistance, loss of income and receiving insufficient information to deal with the pandemic.

People who have a strategical approach to solve problems, generally being more adaptive, show lower scores in all of the 
scales taken into consideration, with the exception of the DASS-21 Stress Subscale and of the IES-R Scale. On the other 
hand, people who more widely adopt avoidance strategies are exposed to higher psychopathological risks on all scales. 
These results confirm the findings of previous studies which also focus on other precarious health conditions. 
A certain correlation is therefore confirmed between negative 
affectivity, levels of awareness, coping strategies and a certain fragility and predisposition towards types of 
psychopathology. More contradictory are the results reported in the systematic review by Xiong and colleagues.
In facts, if on the one hand they confirm the protectivity of a 
secure attachment and a coping approach, on the other hand they also consider an avoidant style as a protective one, 
differently from anxious style. According to the authors, this outcome could be explained by people with an avoidant 
style that might seem calm in a stressful situation or could experiment less distress with social distancing and self-isolation.

The differences between genders reflect the findings of other studies carried out on the COVID-19 pandemic,
with the female population appearing to be generally more exposed to the effects of the pandemic with a more severe 
symptomatology than of the one of the male population. 
Furthermore, having children seems to be a risk factor only with regards to the IES-R scale which measures the chances 
of developing PTSD caused by the trauma.

The categories at the highest risk in socio-demographic terms are, therefore, confirmed as being the female population 
and people with lower education and income. However, it was not possible to detect any significant 
differences between various forms of occupation.

Curiously enough and contrary to what literature may have led us to expect,
going out for a walk and performing physical exercise are not useful factors for the prevention of 
stress, anxiety and depression and can even be worsening factors with regards to the risk of PTSD. This could be explained 
by the worries caused by leaving the house and by the restrictions imposed during periods of lockdown. At the same time, 
the study also documented how carrying out other activities, such as non-essential shopping, does not significantly 
create any greater or lesser psychopathological risk.

Considering that the respondents were located in different countries, no significant random effect on the independent 
variables of the country groupings was encountered. Moreover, a significant and constant effect was registered with country 
variables regarding levels of stress, symptoms of depression and of anxiety and with regards to the risk of PTSD. 
Considering the stress scales, respondents from Italy suffer most from the impact of the pandemic while respondents from China suffer 
the least with regards to stress levels. Even considering the scores regarding depression and anxiety, Italy is the 
worst affected country while, according to the DASS-21 Anxiety subscale, Ecuador is the worst hit country.

An additional factor, is the one defined by the means of communication and of information: greater risks are associated with 
communication and the incessant exposure to potentially traumatic events in the media and eventual fake news and disinformation.

As a matter of fact, according 
to our research, those individuals who use internet to search for information about the pandemic situation are 
associated to higher scores on the stress, depression and PTSD scales compared to those who obtain information 
via radio or television. These same trend in the results are found when comparing those individuals who obtain 
their information from friends and family to those ones who mainly use radio and television as their information 
source. Furthermore, there is a strong association between the amount of time spent to search for information and 
the relative score. In fact, those ones who only search for information from two to five times a week are less at 
risk with regards to psychopathological disorders compared to those ones who never do so or to those ones who, quite 
at the opposite, obstinately look for news about the pandemic several times a day.

Finally, those ones who moderately use social networks by spending an average of one or two hours per day will suffer 
less from the consequences of the lockdowns caused by COVID-19 compared to those ones excessively use or do not use 
social networks at all.

Even in this case, it is noted that being female, belonging to lowest educational background, 
knowing and being concerned about infected people 
and being continuously exposed to COVID-19 news are psychopathological risk factors. In addition, while for the systematic 
review belonging to a poor economic status is predictive of psychopathology, in this study it was observed that people in 
highest economic status are less vulnerable. Differently, the systematic review also found that occupation is a predictive 
psychopathological factor; in particular, students and unemployed suffer more severe consequences of COVID-19 pandemic. 
This difference could be explained by the mediation of different factors such as age, income bracket and education.

When it comes to comparing the respondents located in different countries, both in this study and in the systematic review,
psychopathological symptoms could be explained by the degree of outbreak severity, degree and 
timing of quarantine measures, disclosure of COVID-19 information and other possible sociocultural elements.

Specifically, the less frequent use of the face mask by Polish individuals is correlated 
with higher physical and psychopathological symptoms.

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a dramatic loss of human life worldwide and presents an unprecedented challenge 
to public health, food systems and the world of work. The economic and social disruption caused by the pandemic is 
devastating. Tens of millions of people are at risk of falling into extreme poverty, while the number of undernourished 
people, currently estimated at nearly 690 million, could increase by up to 132 million by the end of the year.

Millions of enterprises face an existential threat. Nearly half of the world’s 3 300 million global workforce are at risk 
of losing their livelihoods. Informal economy workers are particularly vulnerable because the majority lack social 
protection and access to quality health care and have lost access to productive assets. Without the means to earn an 
income during lockdowns, many are unable to feed themselves and their families. For most, no income means no food, or, 
at best, less food and less nutritious food. 

The pandemic has been affecting the entire food system and has laid bare its fragility. The pandemic has decimated jobs and placed 
millions of livelihoods at risk. As breadwinners lose jobs, fall ill and die, particularly the 
most marginalized populations, being hardest hit. 
The food security and nutrition of millions of women and men are under threat.

Millions of agricultural workers – waged and self-employed – while feeding the world, regularly face high levels of 
working poverty. Many of them are spurred to continue 
working, often in unsafe conditions, thus exposing themselves and their families to additional risks. Further, when 
experiencing income losses, they may resort to negative coping strategies, such as distress sale of assets, predatory 
loans or child labour. Migrant agricultural workers are particularly vulnerable. 
Guaranteeing the safety and health of all agri-food workers will be critical to saving 
lives and protecting public health, people’s livelihoods and food security.

In the COVID-19 crisis food security, public health, and employment and labour issues, in particular workers’ health and 
safety, converge. Adhering to workplace safety and health practices and ensuring access to decent work and the protection 
of labour rights in all industries will be crucial in addressing the human dimension of the crisis. Immediate and purposeful 
action to save lives and livelihoods should include extending social protection.
These include workers in the informal economy and in poorly protected and low-paid jobs, 
including youth, older workers, and migrants.

Countries dealing with existing humanitarian crises or emergencies are particularly exposed to the effects of COVID-19.
Responding swiftly to the pandemic, while ensuring that humanitarian and recovery assistance reaches those most in need, is critical.

Now is the time for global solidarity and support, especially with the most vulnerable in our societies, particularly in 
the emerging and developing world. Only together can we overcome the intertwined health and social and economic impacts of 
the pandemic and prevent its escalation into a protracted humanitarian and food security catastrophe.

We must recognize this opportunity to build back better, as noted in the Policy Brief issued by the United Nations 
Secretary-General. We need to develop long-term sustainable strategies to 
address the challenges facing the health and agri-food sectors.

